ZQL - A Simple PHP MySQL Class
=========

A simple class for accessing MySQL in PHP with security built-in. This class keeps track of everything you need and even closes your connection when you're done. Queries are easy, painless and automatically escaped.

How to Use
----------

#### Opening the connection and database

Creating your connection is easier than using just MySQLi. All you need is the username and password if you're connecting to localhost with the same database as username.

```php
$zql = new zql("z43studio_home", "myawesomepassword");
$zql = new zql("z43studio_home", "myawesomepassword", "mydatabase");
$zql = new zql("z43studio_home", "myawesomepassword", "mydatabase", "67.43.23.193");
```

If you are using the first line, you'll connect to `localhost` with the username `z43studio_home`, password `myawesomepassword` and connect to the database with the same name as the username (`z43studio_home`).  
The second line will connect to `localhost` with that username and password, but connect to `mydatabase` instead.  
The third will connect to z43's server. But don't try it because our server won't accept the connection.

#### Making sure you're connected

If you are unsure if your connection is active, you can call `$zql->isConnected();` to make the check.

```php
if (!$zql->isConnected()) {
	echo "There was an error connecting to the server";
	exit();
}
```

#### Making a new query

After you've connected, you can use ZQL to make simple and safe queries to your database. The most recent query is automatically used for getting results if you don't save the `mysqli_result` returned. Use `$zql->query()` just like `mysqli_query()`, `sprintf()` and `mysqli_real_escape_string()` all together. All the arguments after the first will be escaped, so you don't need to worry.

```php
$zql->query("SELECT * FROM `users` WHERE `username` = '%s' AND `password` = '%s' LIMIT 1;", $username, hash('sha-256', $password));
```

This method returns the same result as `mysqli_query` would, therefore, the response is `mysqli_result` for `SELECT`, `SHOW`, `DESCRIBE` or `EXPLAIN` queries and `bool` for all others (whether query was successful or not).

```php
$posts = $zql->query("SELECT * FROM `posts` LIMIT 15;");
for ($i = 0; $i < $zql->rows($users); $i++) {
	$comments = $zql->query("SELECT * FROM `comments` WHERE `post-id` = 5;");
}
```

##### Making an unsafe query

For making queries with standard `sprintf()` functions, you can use the `$zql->unsafeQuery()` call just like `sprintf()` and `mysqli_query()` together. Arguments put into the first string will **not** be escaped. Unsafe Query can also be paired with `$zql->escape()` to get safe values.

```php
$filter = sprintf("`type` = '%s'", $zql->escape($_REQUEST['devices']));
$zql->unsafeQuery("SELECT * FROM `devices` WHERE %s;", $filter);
```

#### Number of rows in a result

You can find the number of rows your query returned by using `$zql->rows();` to give you an integer value or 0. If you need the rows of a query that isn't saved in `$zql->last_query`, just add it in as the first argument.

```php
if ($zql->rows() > 0) {
	echo "There was " . $zql->rows($query) . " result(s) in query.";
} else echo "No results in query";
```

#### Getting results of a query

You can read the data of your queries by using `$zql->cell()` for a specific column in a specific row. With `$zql->cell()`, you can get one of the first row's columns with the first argument, any other rows value with the second argument, and specify the query source with the third.

```php
$row0name = $zql->cell('name');
$row4name = $zql->cell('name', 4);
$row0nameQuery2 = $zql->cell('name', 0, $query2);
```

For an array of an entire row, you can use `$zql->row()`. Argument-less, you'll receive an array for the first row's data. Use the first argument to specify the row, and the second for the query just like before.

```php
$row0 = $zql->row();
$row4 = $zql->row(4);
```

If you want an array of every single row, you can use `$zql->results()`. Without supplying anything, you'll get an array full of subarrays containing each row's data. You can set the query as the first variable like in the other functions.

```php
$results = $zql->results();
```

If you are using multiple queries (rather than using the most recent query), you should supply the `$zql->query()` response (or `mysqli_result`) as the third variable. If you do not, the most recent query will be used.

#### Getting the ID of an inserted row

After querying `INSERT INTO`, you can get the value of the auto_increment field (if available) for the inserted row with:

```php
$zql->query("INSERT INTO `table` (`id`, `string`) VALUES (NULL, 'mystring');");
$newID = $zql->id();
```

You must get the ID of the row before another new row is inserted, as MySQLi is not set up to use this function query-by-query.

See Also
--------

Make sure to check out this stuff out, because it's where all the cool cats go.

* zql.php - The file you need to integrate ZQL (including documentation)  
* [z43 Studio](http://z43studio.com/) - A prime example of ZQL in action—everything I've made.
* [Send Me Something](https://z43studio.com/contact) - Drop me a line, ask a question or offer me a job.